---
layout: post
title:  "Source Coding: Part 1"
date:   2024-11-15
categories: information-theory
permalink: /blog/source-coding1.html
use_math: true
---

<span style="color:green;font-weight:700;font-size:12px">
It’s unfortunate that there aren’t many good open-source fonts designed specifically for dyslexic readers. However, there’s a helpful [Chrome extension](https://chromewebstore.google.com/detail/opendyslexic-for-chrome/cdnapgfjopgaggbmfgbiinmmbdcglnam?pli=1) that can change the font of the text you read online, making it easier to follow.</span>


**Disclaimer**: There are many excellent resources available on source coding from different viewpoints, varying from pure mathematical treatments (e.g., see [this mini-course](https://perso.imcce.fr/alain-chenciner/Shannon.pdf) by Alain Chenciner) to those that have a more engineering flavor. There are also many textbooks, such as [Cover and Thomas](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/book/10.1002/047174882X) that include a chapter on source coding. This blog post is intended to only gather some of the ideas around source coding that I have found interesting, important or insightful.

# Introduction
As it is customary in information theory, we model the source of information as a stochastic process over a finite alphabet $\mathcal{X}$. The source emits symbols from $\mathcal{X}$ according to some probability distribution. Here, we limit ourselves to the case of memoryless sources with i.i.d. outputs, i.e. there is a random variable $X$ such that for all $i$, $X_i \sim X$, and for all $i \neq j$, $X_i$ and $X_j$ are independent.
In this case, the source can be characterized by the probability mass function $p(x)$ of $X$. We may occasionally refer to "$n$ uses of the source", which means that we are considering a message of length $n$ generated by the source.

The main problem we are considering in the source coding setting is to find a way to compress the source outputs (say, $n$ uses of the source) in a reliable way, i.e. we want to encode the source output in a way that allows us to recover the original message.

You may say that compression is not possible if one wants to strictly shorten the message, while having the ability to recover the original message with certainty. However, as [Umesh Vazirani used to point out to his students](https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=40), "If you’ve never missed a flight, you’re spending too much time in airports." We can sacrifice the perfect recovery of the original message in order to achieve much shorter encodings, while still being able to recover the original message *with high probability*. Shannon's source coding theorem tells us there is some fundamental limit, however, on how much we can compress the source outputs while still being able to reliably recover the original message. This limit is governed by the *entropy* of the source.

# Fixing Some Notation
In the rest of this blog post, I will use uppercase letters to denote random variables, and lowercase letters to denote their realizations. For example, $X$ is a random variable and $x$ is a possible realization of $X$. By $x^n$, I mean an output of $n$ uses of the source, i.e. $x^n = x_1x_2\ldots x_n$. Similarly, by $X^n$, I mean the random variable corresponding to $n$ uses of the source, i.e. $X^n = (X_1, X_2, \ldots, X_n)$.

I use $p(X)$ to denote the probability mass function of $X$, and also extend this notation to $p(X^n)$ for the joint probability mass function of $n$ i.i.d. random variables $(X_1, X_2, \ldots, X_n)$.

# Compression: A Rigorous Definition, and a Fundamental Threshold
A naive way of encoding $n$ uses of the source into a binary string gives us a code of length $n \log |\mathcal{X}|$. Can we do better? What do we exactly mean by "better"? 

**Definition** (Fixed-length Compression Schemes): Let $n$ be a positive integer, $\alpha > 0$ and $\delta \in [0,1]$. A fixed-length $(n, \alpha, \delta)$ compression scheme is a pair of functions $(f,g)$, where $f: \mathcal{X}^n \to \\{0,1\\}^{\lfloor \alpha n \rfloor}$ and $g: \\{0,1\\}^{\lfloor \alpha n \rfloor} \to \mathcal{X}^n$, are encoding and decoding functions, respectively, such that 

$$ \mathbb{P} [X^n \in G] \geq 1 - \delta, $$

where  

$$ G = \{ x^n \in \mathcal{X}^n : g(f(x^n)) = x^n \}. $$

In the above definition, $\alpha$ is the number of bits per source use in the compressed message, and $\delta$ is the probability of decoding error. 
Ideally, we would like to find a compression scheme that has both $\alpha$ and $\delta$ as small as possible. Your first intuition might be that there is a trade-off between $\alpha$ and $\delta$. Well, it turns out that that this intuition is not entirely correct. The following theorem, which is the fixed-length version of what Shannon proved in [his seminal paper](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6773024), tells us that if the rate chosen is less than the entropy of the source, then even for the error probability tending to one, we cannot find a compression scheme for large enough $n$.

**Theorem** (Shannon's Source Coding Theorem): Let $\delta \in [0,1]$.
- If $\alpha > H(X)$, then for all but finitely many $n$, there exists a fixed-length $(n, \alpha, \delta)$ compression scheme.
- If $\alpha < H(X)$, then for all but finitely many $n$, there does not exist a fixed-length $(n, \alpha, \delta)$ compression scheme.

Where does this statement come from? There is a simple intuition behind this theorem. When
the source is i.i.d. and $n$ is large enough, we know that a word of length $n$ generated by the source has approximately $n p(a)$ occurrences of every symbol $a \in \mathcal{X}$, *with high probability*. 
This is really what enables us to compress the source outputs. Information theorists call this "typicality", or "Asymptotic Equipartition Property (AEP)". For a mathematician, this is just a concentration of measure phenomenon.

To make this more formal, let us define *typical sets*.

**Definition** (Typical Sets):
Let $X$ be an i.i.d. source over the alphabet $\mathcal{X}$, $n \in \mathbb{N}$ and $\epsilon > 0$. An $(n,\epsilon)$-typical set with respect to $X$ is the set of all strings $x^n = x_1x_2\ldots x_n \in \mathcal{X}^n$ that satisfy

$$ 2^{-n(H(X)+\epsilon)} \leq p(x_1)p(x_2)\ldots p(x_n) \leq 2^{-n(H(X)-\epsilon )}. $$

We denote the $(n,\epsilon)$-typical set by $T_{n,\epsilon}^X$. (we usually drop the superscript $X$ when the source is clear from the context).

You might also see some authors define the typical set as 

$$\{x^n \in \mathcal{X}^n: |\frac{1}{n}\log \frac{1}{p(x^n)} - H(X)| \leq \epsilon\}.$$

It is a simple exercise to show that these two definitions are equivalent.

Wait a minute! How did the entropy suddenly come into the play? Let's go back to the intuition we had earlier. With high probability, a word of length $n$ generated by the source has approximately $n p(a)$ occurrences of every symbol $a \in \mathcal{X}$. What is the probability for one such word to be generated? It is 

$$ \Pi_{a \in \mathcal{X}} p(a)^{n p(a)} = \Pi_{a \in \mathcal{X}} 2^{\log p(a) n p(a)} = 2^{n\sum_{a \in \mathcal{X}} p(a) \log p(a)} = 2^{-n H(X)}. $$

So instead of characterizing the most likely words by their number of occurrences of each symbol, we may decide to characterize them by their probability of being generated. The latter might be better, as now we can use a powerful tool from probability theory, called the law of large numbers, to really show that these strings are indeed the most likely ones. 

First, let us see that for any $\epsilon > 0$, the probability that a word generated by the source is in $T_{n,\epsilon}$ tends to one as $n$ grows. It is in fact very simple: All we need to show is that the expectation of the i.i.d. random variables $-\log p(X_i)$ is $H(X)$. This is a little exercise for one who knows the definition of entropy.

Now, note that $\frac{1}{n} \log \frac{1}{p(X^n)} = \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^n \log \frac{1}{p(X_i)}$. By the (weak) law of large numbers, we have

$$ \frac{1}{n} \log \frac{1}{p(X^n)} = \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^n \log \frac{1}{p(X_i)} \xrightarrow{p} H(X), $$

as $n \to \infty$. This means that for any $\epsilon > 0$ and for any $\delta > 0$, 

$$ \mathbb{P} [X^n \in T_{n,\epsilon}] \geq 1 - \delta, $$

for large enough $n$, or equivalently, 

$$ \lim_{n \to \infty} \mathbb{P} [X^n \in T_{n,\epsilon}] = 1. $$

What we obtained above also tells us something about the cardinality of the typical set. For any $\epsilon, \delta > 0$, we showed that 

$$ \mathbb{P} [X^n \in T_{n,\epsilon}] \geq 1 - \delta, $$

We have

$$ \begin{align}
(1-\delta) \leq \mathbb{P} [X^n \in T_{n,\epsilon}] & = \sum_{x^n \in T_{n,\epsilon}} p(x^n) \\
& \leq |T_{n,\epsilon}| 2^{-n(H(X)-\epsilon)},
\end{align} $$

which implies that $\|T_{n,\epsilon}\| \geq 2^{n(H(X)-\epsilon)}(1-\delta)$. Similarly, we can show that $\|T_{n,\epsilon}\| \leq 2^{n(H(X)+\epsilon)}$. This means that the typical set has a cardinality approximately equal to $2^{nH(X)}$.

# Proof of Shannon's Source Coding Theorem For Fixed-Length Codes

We are now ready to prove Shannon's source coding theorem for fixed-length codes. The proof consists of two parts: the achievability part, which concerns the first bullet point of the theorem, and the converse part, which concerns the second bullet point.

#### Proof of Achievability

Assume that $\alpha > H(X)$. We wish to show that there exists a $T_{n,\epsilon}$ such that $\|T_{n,\epsilon}\| \leq 2^{\lfloor n\alpha \rfloor}$. If we can show the existence of such a typical set, defining a compression scheme is easy. Let $F: \mathcal{X}^n \to T_{n,\epsilon}$ be a function whose restriction to $T_{n,\epsilon}$ is identity, and it is arbitrary elsewhere. Index all the elements of $T_{n,\epsilon}$ in some way, and define $f(x^n)$ to be the index of $F(x^n)$. Now, define $g$ to be the inverse of $f$. This way, the set $G$ corresponding to the compression scheme $(f,g)$ is exactly $T_{n,\epsilon}$, and we know that for any $\delta > 0$, for large enough $n$, $T_{n,\epsilon}$ has probability at least $1-\delta$. Hence, the probability of correct decoding is at least $1-\delta$.

Now, let us show the existence of such a typical set.

Since $\alpha > H(X)$, there exists an $\epsilon > 0$ such that $\alpha > H(X) + 2\epsilon$. Take $n$ large enough so that $n \geq \frac{1}{\epsilon}$, and it is also large enough so that $\mathbb{P} [X^n \in T_{n,\epsilon}] \geq 1 - \delta$. We have

$$ |T_{n,\epsilon}| \leq 2^{n(H(X)+\epsilon)} \leq 2^{n\alpha - n \epsilon} \leq 2^{n\alpha - 1} \leq 2^{\lfloor n\alpha \rfloor}. $$

This completes the proof of the achievability part.

#### Proof of Converse

Assume that $\alpha < H(X)$, and let $(f,g)$ be a fixed-length $(n,\alpha,\delta)$ compression scheme. Consider the set $G = \{ x^n \in \mathcal{X}^n : g(f(x^n)) = x^n \}$. Take $\epsilon > 0$ such that $\alpha < H(X) - \epsilon$. We have

$$ \begin{align}
\mathbb{P} [X^n \in G] & = \mathbb{P} [X^n \in G \cap T_{n,\epsilon}] + \mathbb{P} [X^n \in G \cap T_{n,\epsilon}^c] \\
& \leq \mathbb{P} [X^n \in G \cap T_{n,\epsilon}] + \mathbb{P} [X^n \in T_{n,\epsilon}^c] \\
& \leq |G| 2^{-n(H(X)-\epsilon)} + \mathbb{P} [X^n \in T_{n,\epsilon}^c] \\
& = 2^{\lfloor n\alpha \rfloor - n(H(X)-\epsilon)} + \mathbb{P} [X^n \in T_{n,\epsilon}^c]\\
& \leq 2^{n(\alpha - H(X) + \epsilon)} + \mathbb{P} [X^n \in T_{n,\epsilon}^c].
\end{align} $$

For large enough $n$, we know that $\mathbb{P} [X^n \in T_{n,\epsilon}^c] \leq \frac{\eta}{2}$ for any $\eta > 0$. Moreover, we have $\alpha - H(X) + \epsilon < 0$. This means that for large enough $n$, we have $2^{n(\alpha - H(X) + \epsilon)} \leq \frac{\eta}{2}$. This implies that for large enough $n$, $\mathbb{P} [X^n \in G] \leq \eta$, for any $\eta > 0$, which means that the probability of correct decoding is not lower bounded by $1-\delta$ for any $\delta \in (0,1)$.

Thus, a fixed-length $(n,\alpha,\delta)$ compression scheme does not exist for large enough $n$, which completes the proof of the converse part.


# What's Next?

In the future blog posts, I will discuss how we can reconsider some of the assumptions we made in this post, and how we can extend the results to differnt or more general settings. Two assumptions that are in particular interesting to reconsider are
- We assumed that the source is i.i.d. Can we extend the results to more general sources?
- We assumed that the coding scheme is fixed-length. However, we could also let the length of the codeword be different, and possibly achieve better rates. Is it really possible?

# Acknowledgement

In writing this blog post, I greatly benefited from the lecture materials from [Thomas Debris-Alazard](https://tdalazard.io/)'s course on Information Theory and [Peter Brown](https://peterjbrown519.github.io/)'s course on Quantum Information Theory. I would like to thank them for their excellent teaching and the resources they provided.

# Bibliography

The proof of Shannon's source coding theorem given here is based on the proof of Theorem 5.40 in Watrous' wonderful book, *The theory of quantum information*. You can (legally) find parts of the book online (e.g. [here](https://cs.uwaterloo.ca/~watrous/TQI/TQI.5.pdf#page=35.10)).

Another excellent resource that I humbly suggest you to read is the famous
easy-to-read paper by Shannon, [A Mathematical Theory of Communication](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6773024). It is one of the best examples of "old but gold".

